---
layout: post
date: 0005-06-01
name: readings
title: "Readings"
category: interpersonal-skills
comments: true
---

Whether on the trail, before dinner, or under the tarp on a rainy afternoon, we hope that they inspire thought as well as laughter.

### Individual

The call of action has long been with me; not action divorced from thought but rather flowing from it in one continuous sequence. And when, rarely, there has been full harmony between the two, thought leading to action and finding its fulfillment in it, action leading back to thought and a fuller understanding - then I have sensed a certain fullness of life and a vivid intensity in that moment of existence. But such moments are rare, very rare, and usually one outstrips the other and there is a lack of harmony, and vain effort to bring the two in line. - Jawaharlal Nehru

I would rather be ashes than dust! I would rather my sparks should burn out in a blaze than it should be stifled by dry-rot. I would rather be a superb meteor, every atom of me in magnificent glow, than asleep and permanent as a planet. The principle function of a man is to live, not to exist. I shall not waste my days trying to prolong them. I shall use my time. - Jack London

We do not believe in ourselves until someone reveals that deep inside us something is valuable, worth listening to, worthy of our trust, sacred to our touch. Once we believe in ourselves we can risk curiosity, wonder, spontaneous delight, or any experience that reveals the human spirit. - e.e. cummings

The healthy and strong individual is one who asks for help when he needs it, whether he's got an abscess on his knee or in his soul. - Rona Barrett

Not 'til we are lost...do we begin to find ourselves. - Henry David Thoreau

He who allows his day to pass without practicing generosity and enjoying life's pleasures is like a blacksmith's bellows - he breathes, but he does not live. - Sanskrit Proverb

Simplicity, simplicity, simplicity! I say let your affairs be as two or three, and not a hundred or a thousand; instead of a million count half a dozen... In the midst of this chopping sea of civilized life, such are the clouds and storms and quicksands and the thousand-and-one items to be allowed for, that a man has to live, if he would not founder and go the bottom and not make his port at all, by dead reckoning, and he must be a great calculator indeed who succeeds. Simplify. Simplify. - Henry David Thoreau

To be nobody but myself in a world which is doing its best, night and day, to make me everybody else means to fight the hardest battle which any human being can fight, and never stop fighting. - e.e. cummings

Everybody thinks of changing humanity and nobody thinks of changing himself. - Leo Tolstoy

From the Son of Heaven down to the common people, all must regard cultivation of the personal life as the root. A disordered root cannot grow into ordered branches. If what is near is neglected, how can one take care of what is far away? - Confucius

It is easy in the world to live after the world's opinion; it is easy in solitude to live after our own; but the great man is he who in the midst of the crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the independence of solitude. - Ralph Waldo Emerson

Be who you are and say how you feel because those who mind don't matter and those who matter don't mind. - Dr. Seuss

They teach you to be proud and unbending in honest failure, but humble and gentle in success; not to substitute words for action; not to seek the path of comfort, but face the stress and spur of difficulty and challenge; to learn to stand up in the storm, but to have compassion on those who fall; to master yourself before you seek to master others; to have a heart that is clean, a goal that is high; to learn to laugh, yet never forget how to weep; to reach into the future, but never neglect the past; to be serious, yet never take yourself too seriously; to be modest so that you will remember the simplicity of true greatness; the open mind of true wisdom, the meekness of true strength. - Douglas MacArthur

Don't ask what the world needs. Ask what makes you come alive, and go do it. Because what the world needs is people who have come alive. - Howard Thurman

### Nature

You never conquer a mountain. You can stand on the summit a few moments; then the wind blows your footprints away. - Arlene Blum

I have never felt lonesome, or in the least oppressed by a sense of solitude, but once, and that was a few weeks after I came to the woods, when, for an hour, I doubted if the near neighborhood of man was not essential to a serene and healthy life. To be alone was something unpleasant. But I was at the same time conscious of a slight insanity in my mood, and seemed to foresee my recovery. In the midst of a gentle rain while these thoughts prevailed, I was suddenly sensible of such sweet and beneficent society in Nature, in the very pattering of the drops, and in every sound and sight around my house, an infinite and unaccountable friendliness all at once like an atmosphere sustaining me, as made the fancied advantages of human neighborhood insignificant, and I have never thought of them since. Every little pine needle expanded and swelled with sympathy and befriended me. I was so distinctly made aware of the presence of something kindred to me, even in scenes which we are accustomed to call wild and dreary, and also that the nearest of blood to me and humanest was not a person nor a villager, that I thought no place could ever be strange to me again. - Henry David Thoreau

In this modern age, very little remains that is real. Night has been banished, so have the cold, the wind and the stars, They have all been neutralized; the rhythm of life itself is obscured. Everything goes fast and makes so much noise, and men hurry by without heeding the grass by the roadside, its smell, its color, and the way it shimmers when the wind caresses it...we should experience hunger and thirst, be able to go fast, but also know how to go slowly and contemplate. - Gaston Rebuffat

What a thing it is to sit absolutely alone, in the forest, at night, cherished by this wonderful, unintelligible, perfectly innocent speech, the most comforting speech in the world, the talk that rain makes by itself all over the ridges, and the talk of the water courses everywhere in the hollows! Nobody started it, nobody is going to stop it. It will take as long as it wants, this rain. As long as it talks, I am going to listen. - Thomas Merton, Earth Prayers

There is a fitness in natural experience, an intimacy that may not be superseded. How many, in this world of devices, now live through the lifetime of tides, nights of clean wind and clear stars above the rooflines, know the genuine exposure to cold rain, cold water, and stiff fingers, and know how to be steady there? - John Hay

I gave my heart to the mountains the moment I stood beside this river with its spray in my face and watched it thunder into foam, smooth to green glass over sunken rocks, shatter to foam again... It was rare and comforting to waken late and hear the undiminished shouting of the water in the night. And at sun up it was still there, powerful and incessant, with the slant sun tangled in its rainbow spray, the grass blue with wetness, and the air heady as ether and scented with campfire smoke. By such a river it is impossible to believe that one will ever be tired or old. Every sense applauds it. Taste it, feel its chill on the teeth: it is purity absolute. Watch its racing current, its steady renewal of force: it is transient and eternal. And listen again to its sounds: get far enough away so that the sound of falling tons of water does not stun the ears, and hear how much is going on underneath a whole symphony of smaller sounds, hiss and splash and gurgle, the small talk of side channels, the whisper of blown and scattered spray gathering itself and beginning to flow again, secret and irresistible, among the wet rocks. - Wallace Stegner

You are a child of the universe, no less than the trees and the stars; you have a right to be here. - Desiderata

To honor and respect means to think of the land and the water and plants and animals who live here as having a right equal to our own to be here. We are not the supreme and all-knowing beings, living at the top of the pinnacle of evolution, but in fact we are members of the sacred hoop of life along with the tree and rocks, the coyotes and the eagles and fish and toads, that each fulfills its purpose. They each perform their given task in the sacred hoop, and we have one, too. - Wolf Song of the Abenaki tribe

In our way of life...with every decision we make, we always keep in mind the seventh generation of children to come...When we walk upon Mother Earth, we always plant our feet carefully, because we know that the faces of future generations are looking up at us from beneath the ground. We never forget them. - Oren Lyons, Faithkeeper of the Onandaga Nation

Climb mountains and get their good tidings. Nature's peace will flow into you as sunshine flows into trees. The winds will blow their own freshness into you, and the storms their energy, while cares will drop off like the autumn leaves. - John Muir

How can you buy or sell the sky, the warmth of the land? The idea is strange to us. If we do not own the freshness of the air and the sparkle of the water, how can you buy them? Every part of this earth is sacred to my people. Every shining pine needle, every sandy shore, every mist in the dark woods, every clearing, and humming insect is holy in the memory and experience of my people... Our dead never forget this beautiful earth, for it is the mother of the red men. We are part of the earth and it is part of us. The perfumed flowers are our sisters; the deer, the horse, the great eagle, these are our brothers. The rocky crests, the juices of the meadows, the body heat of the pony, and man - all belong to the same family... All things are connected like the blood which unites one family. All things are connected. Whatever befalls the earth, befalls the sons and daughters of the earth. Man did not weave the web of life, he is merely a strand in it. Whatever he does to the web, he does to himself. - Chief "Seattle," representing all American Indian Nations in 1854 at the tribal assembly concerning the sale of land in Washington to the government

I wondered how it was possible to walk for an hour through the woods and see nothing of note. I who cannot see find hundreds of things: the delicate symmetry of a leaf, the smooth skin of a silver birch, the rough, shaggy bark of a pine. I who am blind can give one hint to those who see: use your eyes as if tomorrow you will have been stricken blind. Hear the music of voices, the songs of a bird, the mighty strains of an orchestra as if you would be stricken deaf tomorrow. Touch each object as if tomorrow your tactile sense would fail. Smell the perfume of flowers, taste with relish each morsel, as if tomorrow you could never taste or smell again. Make the most of every sense. Glory in all the facets and pleasures and beauty which the world reveals to you. - Helen Keller

### Challenge

It is not the critic who counts, nor the man who points out how the strong man stumbled or where the doer of deeds could have done them better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena. Whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood. Who strives valiantly, who errs and comes up short again and again. Who knows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, and spends himself in a worthy cause. Who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievement. And who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly; so that his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who know neither victory nor defeat. - Theodore Roosevelt

If one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours...If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them. - Henry David Thoreau

The truth is that part of the essence of mountain climbing is to push oneself to one's limits. Inevitably this involves risk, otherwise they would not be one's limits. This is not to say that you deliberately try something you know you can't do. But you do deliberately try something which you are not sure you can do. - Woodrow Wilson

Keep your eyes on the stars and your feet in the ground. - Theodore Roosevelt

The secret of knowing the fertile experiences and the greatest joys in life is to live dangerously. - Friedrich Nietzsche

It was a high counsel that I once heard given to a young person, "Always do what you are afraid to do." - Ralph Waldo Emerson

You can't stay in your corner of the forest waiting for others to come to you. You have to go to them sometimes. - A.A. Milne

"If the person you are talking to does not appear to be listening, be patient. It may simply be that he has a small piece of fluff in his ear." - A.A. Milne

It isn't the mountains ahead to climb that wear you out; it's the pebble in your shoe. - Muhammad Ali

### Teamwork/Service

Everybody can be great. Because anybody can serve. You don't have to have a college degree to serve. You don't have to make your subject and verb agree to serve. You don't have to know about Plato and Aristotle to serve. You don't have to know about Einstein's theory of relativity to serve. You don't have to know the second theory of thermodynamics in physics to serve. You only need a heart full of grace. A soul generated by love. - Martin Luther King, Jr.

It is one of the most beautiful compensations of this life that no man can help another without helping himself. - Ralph Waldo Emerson

You are the way and the wayfarers. And when one of you falls down he falls for those behind him, a caution against the stumbling stone. Way, and he falls for those ahead of him, who though faster and surer of foot, yet removed not the stumbling stone. - Kahlil Gibran

In a real sense all life is interrelated. All persons are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. Whatever affects one directly affects all indirectly. I can never be what I ought to be until you are what you ought to be, and you can never be what you ought to be until I am what I ought to be. This is the interrelated structure of reality. - Martin Luther King, Jr.

### Leadership

A leader is best when people barely know he exists. Not so good when people obey and acclaim him. Worse when they despise him. Fail to honor people, they fail to honor you. But of a good leader, who talks little, when his work is done, his aim fulfilled, the people will say, "We did this ourselves." - Lao-tzu

Never tell people how to do things. Tell them what to do and they will surprise you with their ingenuity. - General George Patton

Leadership has to do with how people are. You don't teach people a different way of being, you create conditions so that they can discover where their natural leadership comes from. - Peter Senge

Gentleness is a divine trait: nothing is so strong as gentleness, and nothing is so gentle as real strength. - Ralph W. Sockman

Treat a man as a he is and he will remain as he is. Treat a man as he can and should be and he shall become as he can and should be. - Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

Be the change you want to see in the world. - Gandhi

### Learning

You cannot stay on the summit forever; you have to come down again...So why bother in the first place? Just this: what is above knows what is below, but what is below does not know what is above. In climbing, always take note of difficulties along the way; for as you go up, you can observe them. Coming down, you will no longer see them, but you will know they are there if you have observed them well. One climbs, one sees. One descends, one sees no longer but one has seen. There is an art of conducting oneself in the lower regions by the memory of what one saw higher up. When one can no longer see, one can at least still know. - Rene Dumal

Today is a new day; you'll get out of it just what you put into it. If you have made mistakes, even serious mistakes, you can make a new start whenever you choose. For the thing we call failure is not the falling, but the staying down. - Mary Pickford

It is not from ourselves that we will learn to be better than we are. - Wendell Berry

Education is not preparation for life. Education is life.  - John Dewey

I find that a great part of the information I have was acquired by looking for something and finding something else on the way. - Franklin P. Adams

The greatest wonder is that we can see these trees and not wonder more. - Ralph Waldo Emerson

The knack of flying is learning how to throw yourself at the ground and miss. - The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy

When one door closes, another opens; but we often look so long and so regretfully upon the closed door that we do not see the one which has opened for us. - Alexander Graham Bell

### Mistakes

Strong people make as many and as ghastly mistakes as weak people. The difference is that strong people admit them, laugh at them, learn from them. That is how they become strong. - Richard Needham

OK, so ten out of ten for style, but minus several million for good thinking, yeah? - The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy

Experience is simply the name we give our mistakes. - Oscar Wilde

Our greatest glory is not in never failing, but in rising every time we fall. - Confucius

### The Journey

Climb mountains not so the world can see you, but so you can see the world. - Grace Aranow

Alice looked round her in great surprise. "Why, I do believe we've been under this tree all the time! Everything's just as it was!"
"Of course it is," said the Queen: "What would you have it?"
"Well, in our country," said Alice, still panting a little, "you'd generally get to somewhere else - if you ran very fast for a long time, as we've been doing."
"A slow sort of country!" said the Queen. "Now, here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!" - Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

As you set out for Ithaka
hope that your journey is a long one,
full of adventure, full of discovery.
Laistrygonians and Cyclops,
angry Poseidon - do not be afraid of them:
such as these you will never find
as long as you keep your thoughts raised high, as long as a rare
sensation touches your spirit and your body.
Laistrygonians and Cyclops,
wild Poseidon - you will not meet them
unless you carry them in your soul,
unless your soul raises them up before you.

Hope that your journey is a long one.
May there be many Summer mornings
when with what pleasure, what joy -
you come into harbors seen for the first time;
may you stop at Phoenician trading stations,
to buy fine things,
mother of pearl and coral, amber and ebony,
sensuous perfumes of every kind,
as many sensuous perfumes as you can;
may you visit many Egyptian cities,
to learn and learn again from those who know.

Keep Ithaka always in your mind.
Arriving there is what you are destined for.
But don't hurry the journey at all.
Better it last for years,
so that when you reach the island you are old,
wealthy with all you have gained on the way,
not expecting Ithaka to make you rich.
Ithaka gave you the marvelous journey.
Without her you would not have set out.
She has nothing else to give you.

And if you find her poor, Ithaka won't have fooled you.
Wise as you will have become, so full of experience,
you will have understood by then what these Ithakas mean. - [Ithaka][connery], by C. P. Cavafy

“What day is it?"
"It's today," squeaked Piglet.
"My favorite day," said Pooh.  - A. A. Milne

'What is REAL?' asked the rabbit one day... 'Does it happen all at once or bit by bit?' 'It doesn't happen all at once,' said the Skin Horse. 'You become. It takes a long time. That's why it doesn't often happen to people who break easily, or have sharp edges, or who have to be carefully kept. Generally, by the time you are Real, most of your hair has been loved off, and your eyes drop out and you get loose in the joints and very shabby. But these things don't matter at all, because once you are Real you can't be ugly, except to people who don't understand.' - Margery Williams, The Velveteen Rabbit

To laugh often and much; To win the respect of intelligent people and the affection of children; To earn the appreciation of honest critics and endure the betrayal of false friends; To appreciate beauty, to find the best in others; To leave the world a bit better, whether by a healthy child, a garden patch, or a redeemed social condition; To know even one life had breathed easier because you have lived. This is to have succeeded. - Ralph Waldo Emerson

The journey of a thousand miles begins with one step. - Lao Tzu

All that is gold does not glitter, Not all who wander are lost. - J. R. R. Tolkien

How we got there, we alone know. If we sought to tell others, what the wiser were they? Suffice it that here at the summit you and I stand. - Herman Melville, The Enchanted Isles

Rivers know this: there is no hurry. We shall get there some day. - Winnie the Pooh

Look well to this day, for it is life, the very life of life. In it lies all the realities and verities of existence: the bliss of growth, the glory of action, splendor of beauty. For yesterday is but a dream, and tomorrow only a vision. But today well lived makes every yesterday a dream of happiness and every tomorrow a vision of hope. - Sanskrit proverb

An inconvenience is only an adventure wrongly considered; an adventure is an inconvenience rightly considered. - G.K. Chesterton

It's a magical world, Hobbes ol' buddy. Let's go exploring! - Calvin

### Sucking the Marrow

I suppose I should wish you success, but that is too easy. I would like to wish you something that is harder to come by. So I am going to wish you meaning in life. And meaning is not something you stumble across like the answer to a riddle or prize in a treasure hunt.
Meaning is something you build into your life. You build it out of your own past, out of your affections and loyalties, out of the experience of humankind as it is passed on to you; out of your own talent and understanding, out of things and people you love, out of the values for which you are willing to sacrifice something, the ingredients are there. 
You are the only one who can put them together into that unique pattern that will be your life. Let it be a life that has dignity and meaning for you. If it does, then the particular balance of success or failure is of less account. - Robert Gardner

One of the misfortunes of advancing age is that you get out of touch with the sunrise. You take it for granted, and it is over and done with before you settle yourself for the daily routine. That is one reason, I think, why, when we grow older, the days seem shorter. We miss the high moments of their beginning. - John Buchan

It is curious that physical courage should be so common, and moral courage so rare. - Mark Twain

To live is so startling it leaves time for little else. - Emily Dickenson

What is life? It is the flash of a firefly in the night. It is the breath of a buffalo in the winter time. It is the little shadow which runs across the grass and loses itself in the Sunset. - Crowfoot of the Blackfoot Nation, on his death bed, 1890

If I had my life to live over again, I'd dare to make more mistakes next time. I'd relax. I would be sillier than I have been on this trip. I would take fewer things seriously. I would take more chances. I would take more trips. I would climb more mountains and swim more rivers. I would eat more ice cream and less beans. I would perhaps have more troubles, but I'd have fewer imaginary ones.
You see, I'm one of those people who live sensibly and sanely hour after hour, day after day. Oh, I've had my moments, and if I had it to do over again, I'd have more of them. In fact, I'd try to have nothing else. Just moments, one after another instead of living so many years ahead of each day. I've been one of those persons who never goes anywhere without a thermometer, a hot water bottle, a raincoat and a parachute. If I had it to do again, I would travel lighter than I have. If I had my life to live over, I would start barefoot earlier in the spring and stay that way later in the fall. I would go to more dances. I would ride more merry-go-rounds. I would pick more daisies. - Nadine Stair

Mountains should be climbed with as little effort as possible and without desire. The reality of your own nature should determine the speed. If you become restless speed up. If you become winded, slow down. You climb the mountain in an equilibrium between restlessness and exhaustion. Then, when you're no longer thinking ahead, each footstep isn't just a means to an end but a unique event in itself. This leaf has jagged edges. This rock looks loose. From this place the snow is less visible, even though closer. There are the things you should notice anyway. To live only for some future goal is shallow. It's the sides of the mountains which sustain life, not the top. - Robert Pirsig in Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance

Courage is being scared to death but saddling up anyways. - John Wayne

I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practise resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and genuine meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world; or if it were sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true account of it in my next excursion. - Henry David Thoreau

[connery]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1n3n2Ox4Yfk
