---
layout: post
date: 0004-03-01
name: service
title: "Service"
category: technical-skills
comments: true
---

In the past, FOP offered four classes of trips: backpacking, switch, service, and in-site. Service trips were introduced to FOP by SC '93 as backpacking trips that did 1-2 days of trail work with the GMC in Vermont in order to give back to the national forests FOP visits and cherishes. Between 2006 and 2008, FOP did not sent trips to Vermont, which meant that backpacking service trips had fallen by the wayside. In-site was pioneered by SC '05 in an effort to appeal to FOPpers who, for reasons of comfort, experience or ability, could not participate on back- packing trips. In-site trips are based at a single campsite, either an AMC lodge or campground, and consist of day-hikes, service-work and one overnight trip. SC '09 merged the categories of service and in-site in order to expand the environmental service work that FOP does in the field while maintaining a space for FOPpers of diverse backgrounds to participate in our program.

### Purpose and Philosophy

At its core, FOP is a service organization, offering a service to incoming freshmen in terms of advising and acclimation to Harvard, to its leaders in terms of leadership development and to the outdoors. Service trips offer a unique opportunity for FOP to give back to the beautiful national forests we visit, as well as providing a glimpse into potential service opportunities at Harvard. Additionally, they allow incoming freshmen the chance to participate in FOP in both backpacking and non-backpacking contexts. In this respect, service trips cater to two populations of FOPpers: 1) FOPpers who for reasons of comfort, experience, or ability may not be able to be backpack, and 2) FOPpers who are passionate about environmental justice. Service trips stay in one location for the trip - either a frontcountry facility such as a lodge or campground, or a backcountry campsite - and perform trail-work including building rock staircases, digging water bars, constructing latrines, and clearing, maintaining and making trails.

On a backpacking trip, an important source of group cohesion is the challenge of hiking from campsite to campsite with everything we need on our backs. There is a sense of group accomplishment that comes from achieving a certain amount of mileage each day, or making it to a far-off campsite. Service projects offer a different and powerful challenge around which the group can rally and bond. As a leader you are encouraged to place an emphasis on teamwork and use the project as a way of creating strong ties between members of the group. Additionally, you are encouraged to emphasize the importance of the project for the future of the wilderness and future hikers.

### Logistics

Every summer, service projects are proposed by the AMC and RMC and are organized and conducted in conjunction with these organizations. FOP leaders will either meet with caretakers who provide the tools and project guidelines. It is important for leaders to meet with caretakers to discuss the project and proper use of equipment.

#### 24 Hour Plan

Think about how you want to present the frontcountry component of the service trip to your FOPpers if they do not yet know that they are on the trip. Incorporate teaching about FOP stranger policy into your 24 hour plan as you will be more likely to be around strangers since you are closer to civilization at all times.

##### Games and Initiatives

Take some time to think about what games and initiative you want to do on the trail and at the campsite because you will have more down time than most other trips will have. This is an awesome part of the trip in which you can really take advantage of the wonderful games and initiatives contained in the handbook. Be creative and don't be afraid of creating challenging experiences for your FOPpers.

##### Day Hiking Guidelines

The following is a list of the basics that you and your FOPpers should bring although you can definitely bring more in your packs if you would like to.

Common gear to bring (either in the leaders' backpacks or spread out in the group):

- The medkit
- One large tarp and one personal tarp
- One sleeping bag and one sleeping pad
- One stove and one fuel bottle
- One full pack of one leader's extra clothing

Each FOPper should have:

- Full raingear
- Extra warm layers for top and bottom
- Two water bottles
- All of the gear should be waterproofed, similar to if you were doing overnight backpacking.
- Hopefully each FOPper will be able to detach the tops of their backpacks or they will have brought an extra daypack that FOP has recommended.

##### Bathroom/Shower Policy

Frontcountry service trips may have extra-special luxuries such as bathrooms and showers. This is a policy that should be worked out with your co-leader before the trip begins. One of the luxuries of leading a frontcountry service trip is that you will probably have a toilet and a shower at or near your campsite. You need to think about how you want to present the showers to your FOPpers and what rules you will make for their use e.g. how long you will allow your FOPper to take in the shower and how many of them can shower every night. As a leader, you can set an example by not showering so that FOPpers realize that it is OK not to shower. FOPpers may choose not to shower for the week in order to be more 'hardcore.'

#### Safety Policies and Procedures

Service trips have additional risks related to the completion of a project in sometimes less than ideal conditions with potentially dangerous equipment. It is for these reasons that service FOP leaders must be extremely vigilant. The safety of participants must always take precedence over the completion of the project. Projects are set in terms of days, not projects to be completed. The expectation is that FOP will contribute to the project, but not necessarily complete the project if time or other factors make this undesirable. You are expected to do the best you can, but never to allow the project to compromise the safety of participants.

##### Supervision

- FOP leaders are expected to oversee the safe use of all equipment and proper execution of the project as explained by the caretakers.
- FOP leaders are expected to consider and make participants aware of environmental risks (e.g. excessive sun exposure, cold and/or wet conditions, unsafe proximity to steep slopes, etc.).
- Participants should be made aware of the location of FOP leaders throughout the project.
- FOP leaders should inform participants of the location of the medical kit throughout the project.
- Participants always have the option to refrain from activity they consider to be physically or emotionally unsafe.

##### Instruction and Execution

- AMC and GMC caretakers are expected to explain the proper use of equipment.
- Participants are expected to conduct themselves in a manner consistent with the instruction of FOP leaders and caretakers.
- No horseplay.
- FOPpers are not allowed to use chainsaws.
- FOPpers should be instructed on the proper way to lift heavy objects, i.e. avoid lifting with the back by bending at the knees.
- FOP leaders and FOPpers should create a communication system to eliminate dangers such as falling trees and branches, e.g. before tree falls: "clear area," then "falling" to indicate the start of the tree falling.

Debriefs of service at the end of the day are probably the most appropriate forum for this type of discussion. Some possible debrief questions are:

- How did you feel about the work you did today?
- What are we trying to accomplish? Do you think this project is important? Why do you think this project is important?
- Was there a time today when you needed help with an aspect of the project? Did you ask for help? Did someone else offer help to you?
- Did you learn something today?

Interacting and sharing power with service agencies:

- Talk to the service leader about how the day(s) will go ahead of time. You might want to address breaks, lunch, how much work is planned, and when the end of the day will be.
- As leaders, you are responsible for reading the group and making decisions that depend on that.
- Don't be afraid to ask the service leader if you can modify the project to better suit your group. They are generally very nice and flexible.
- Talk about logistics, power sharing, and FOP rules.
- If possible, try to get in touch with your service leader during pre-FOP.

Things to do during downtime:

- Some service trips end up with a significant amount of downtime, since you don't always move camp every night.
- Although FOP songs and games are great, longer, more significant activities can be useful for filling time and making an evening meaningful.
- Two big activities can be Fear in a Hat and Fuzzy Cheesecake. Thus, other activities can fit well into this framework.


Other activities:

- Hot Seat: The whole group sits in a circle, and each person takes a turn in the "Hot Seat." The group then asks that person a set number of questions. These questions range from "What was the proudest moment in your life" to "Brad Pitt or George Clooney?" Bonding will follow.
- Pictionary/telephone variation: Everyone sits in a circle and each person writes a sentence at the top of a piece of paper. Then you pass the paper to the right, and the next person draws a picture that depicts the sentence. They fold the paper to the original is hidden, pass to their right, and then the next person writes a sentence that describes the picture. Repeat. Be wary of inappropriateness.
- Life stories: Each person has 3 minutes to tell their life story. Then the rest of the group has 1 minute to ask questions.
- Letters: Each writes a letter to themselves, which the leaders will collect and send to them at some point (perhaps two years later).
- Active listening: Pair people up. Everyone talks to their partner for a set period of time and their partner just listens.
- The Service Conversation: You can address the question of why we do service and how it relates to Harvard, by initiating a conversation on the first day. Since we framed it as a discussion, it didn't seem like we were forcing a pre-determined set of "take-aways."

Medical issues:

- Some FOPpers are on service trips due to pre-existing medical conditions that exclude them from another FOP trip.
- Pay attention to medical conditions during the initial medical check in and ask everyone why they are on a service trip. You will have enlightening conversations about service thoughts, medical conditions, or both!

Tools:

- Make sure your service leader reviews safety protocols and how to use tools properly and safely.
- Learn how to safely and effectively carry tools. Think about carrying and packing tools in the pattern of leaving camp.