---
layout: post
date: 0005-07-01
name: songs
title: "Songs"
category: interpersonal-skills
comments: true
---

Songs are a big part of the FOP experience, but most cannot be done justice in this handbook. To truly experience a song, ask a fellow FOP leader or group of leaders to perform it for you.

### Banana Cheer

Bananas have no thumbs, bananas do not smile, bananas stand up straight. 

Bananas of the world unite! Bananas split!

Go bananas, go go bananas! (repeat, while dancing and spinning)

Peel bananas, peel peel bananas (repeat, while peeling and spinning)

Peel it to the left, peel it to the right, peel it down the middle and uh, take a bite.

### Beaver Song

Beavers one beavers all lets all do the beaver call.

Beavers two beavers three lets all climb the beaver tree.

Beavers four beavers five lets all do the beaver jive.

Beavers six beavers seven lets all fly to beaver heaven.

Beavers eight beavers nine, stop it's beaver time.

### Boom Boom Chang

Hey FOP 3 (Yeah?) My name is Lizzie (Yeah?) I've got a dance (Yeah?) And it goes like this: (What, what what?) Boom boom chang chang boom chang. 

Each round, a new person "calls" the song and demonstrates a dance move for one cycle. The entire group does the dance move for another cycle, and then the entire group does each preceding dance move for one cycle until each member of the circle has added a dance move. Great for a warm up and name reminder.

### Canoe/Switch Song

Boats passing, away from (sing Wey oh, oh wey oh way)/towards (sing Lie lie lie lie, lie lie lie lie, lie lie lie lie lie) home about to embark on/after two years of hunting on the sea.

### Eat A (the Americanized version) 

Eat

Eat a

Eat a lot a Pizza

Eat a lot a, eat a lot a, eat a lot a pizza

Oh, no no no, don't eat the pizza

Pizza got a lot a hot and spicy pepperoni on it 

Got a lot a hot and spicy roni on the top

### ERA's song

Ground squirrel, ground squirrel, shake your bushy tail (repeat)

Crinkle up your little nose, put a nut between your toes 

Ground squirrel, ground squirrel, shake your bushy tail

(REPEAT faster and faster!)

### Gopher Song

(Invented by Nate Dern.)

Hey! What's that, under the ground?

Shhh! I think I hear a little sound.

I hear a foot: tap tap (pause) tap tap (while tapping your foot).

I hear a paw: claw claw (pause) claw claw (while clawing with your hand).

I see a face: gnaw gnaw (pause) gnaw gnaw (while gnawing and turning your face).

It's Gopher Time! Go! Go! Go! Go! Go! Go!

To sing the song, start with the first two verses, and the tapping verse. Then repeat all those verses and add the clawing verse. Repeat again, adding the gnawing verse. Then sing the whole thing.

### Moose

(Make up your own verses, too, and add movements...) 

There was a great big moose, Who liked to drink a lot of juice (x2)

Chorus: Singin' wa-oh. Way-o-way-o way-o way-o Waaaay-o way-o. Way-o way-o way-o way-o.

The moose's name was Fred, He liked to drink his juice in bed (x2) 

CHORUS

He drank his juice with care, But he got some in his hair (x2)

CHORUS

He had a sista named Rita, Who liked to eat a lot of pita. X2

CHORUS


Now he's a sticky moose, But he's a moose, Full of juice, On the looooose 

CHORUS

### The Pirate Song

(Introduced by Becky Hersher '11) 

When I was one, I sucked my thumb

The day I went to sea I climbed aboard the pirate ship

The captain said to me

We're going this way, that way, forward, backward 

Over the Irish Sea

A bottle of Coke to soothe my throat

And that's the life for me!

Oh oh oh HEY, oh oh oh HO

When I was two, I tied my shoe

The day I went to sea...etc.

(3 skinned my knee, 4 slammed the door, 5 learned to drive)

### Ride That Pony!

(Form two circles: one facing out, one facing in.) 

Ride, ride, ride that pony, get up and ride that big fat pony. Ride, ride, ride that pony, this is what she told me.

Back to back to back, my baby, front to front to front, my baby Side to side to side, my baby, this is what she told me.

### Tarzan

(This is a repeat after me song.)

Taaarzan

Swingin on a rubber band

Taaarzan

Got hit by a fryin pan.

Ouch that hurt

Now Tarzan has a tan And I hope it don't peel Like a banana

Jane

Riding on a bullet train 

Jane

Got hit by an airplane 

Ouch that hurt

Now Jane has a pain, and Tarzan has a tan and I hope it don't peel

Like a banana.

Cheetah

A-groovin' to the beatah 

Cheetah

Got eatin by a beaver 

Ouch that hurt

Now cheetah is no vita and Jane has a pain and Tarzan has a tan and I hope it don't peel,

Like a banana.

### The Penguin Dance

Have you ever seen a penguin come to tea?

Take a look at me, a penguin you will see.

Penguins, attention! Penguins, salute!

Right arm!

(Repeat the verse adding a body part movement each time: left arm, right leg, left leg, nod your head, stick out your tongue, turn around)

### The Princess Pat

(This is a repeat after me song.)

The Princess Pat. (The Princess Pat.)

Lived in a tree. (Lived in a tree.)

She sailed across (She sailed across)

The seven seas. (The seven seas.)

(Then the whole group sings the verse again without repeating.)

She sailed across / The channel two / And brought with her / The rickabambo.

Now what is that / Its something made / By the Princess Pat. / Its red and gold / And purple too. / That's why its called / the rickabambo.

Now captain Jack / Had a mighty fine crew / He sailed across / The channel two.

But his ship sunk / And yours will too / If you forget / The rickabambo.

### The Self-Worth Song

I'm proud, I'm strong, I'm ready for whatever comes along.

I've got good friends, we'll stick together till the end.

I like myself! I'm worth a lot! I like myself! I'm worth a lot!

And don't you tell me that I'm not 'cause you can't see inside of me.

### Young Rider

(Courtesy of Susan: mount yo' hahwse and saddle up!)

(bouncing) Young rider, apple-cheeked one, come hither riding. On your steed, so proud and prancing (toss your head), come hither riding(with gusto and arms thrown out). No matter where I ride! (indicating the peaks looming all around) Slavic mountains by my side! (scouting to either side with hand shielding eyes) To shomora, to shomo-o-o-o-ra (= little heart)

### Boba the Fett

(This is a repeat after me song.)

My backpack's got jets

I'm Boba the Fett

I bounty hunt

For Jabba the Hut

To Finance my Vet

I chill in... Deep Space

A mask is over my FACE

I deliver the price,


But still narrow my eyes,

Because my time I don't like to waste.

Get down.

### Captain Jack

(Credit to Brett Silverman; call and response each line.) 

Hey OH Captain Jack.

Take me down to the railway track.

Got my boots, got my hat.

I'm gonna be in a marchin' band.

Go left, go left, go left go right go left.

Go left, go right, go pick up the tracks, go left go right go left.

(Repeat faster and faster.)
         
### Little Red Wagon

(Call and response after each line.) 

You can't ride in my little red wagon

Front seat's broken and the axle's draggin'

Chugga

Chugga, chugga, chugga

This is the second verse, different from the first

A little bit louder and a little bit worse!

Front seat's broken and the axle's draggin'

Chugga

Chugga, chugga, chugga

(Repeat, getting louder and louder.)